Additional 'keycloak' authorization documentation (#3989)
strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator: documentation/modules/oauth/con-oauth-authorization-keycloak-example.adoc

// Module included in the following module:
//
// con-oauth-authorization-keycloak-authorization-services.adoc

[id='con-oauth-authorization-keycloak-example_{context}']

> = Keycloak Authorization Services Example

Reviewer: Can we introduce what we're trying to achieve with this example?

Author: Hmmm ... It's an end to end example that demonstrates how to configure permissions. It's actually the more important addition in terms of helping users to use Keycloak Authorization Services for authorization. It is a 'port' of examples/README-authz.md from Docker to Strimzi and was requested by users. As such it is written in a different style as the regular documentations.

I don't know how to address the sections part but the introduction could be something like:
```suggestion
= Keycloak Authorization Services Example

This is an end-to-end example of using Keycloak Authorization Services to configure authorization rules for use with `keycloak` authorization in Strimzi.
The example starts by deploying the Keycloak server with pre-configured realm, requiring no additional configuration.
We deploy the Kafka cluster configured to use one of the pre-configured realms.
We connect to the Keycloak Admin Console and demonstrate the sections of the UI where authorizations rules are configured.
We use Kafka CLI client tools with different personal and service accounts to demonstrate limited access based on the permissions granted to different accounts.

```

Reviewer: Great. Looks good Marko. Couple of things: _with pre-configured realm**s**_? And we use _user interface_ rather than _UI_. :+1:

> = Keycloak Authorization Services Example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Example authorization rules configuration using Authorization Services
```

> ## Token Based Authorization with Keycloak Authorization Services

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Token Based Authorization with Keycloak Authorization Services
```

> Once the Kafka Broker has obtained an access token by using Strimzi Kafka OAuth for authentication, it is possible to use centrally managed authorization rules to enforce access restrictions onto Kafka Clients.

Reviewer: Are we replacing OAuth with OAuth 2.0?

> For this Strimzi Kafka OAuth supports the use of `Keycloak Authorization Services`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this, Strimzi Kafka OAuth supports the use of Keycloak Authorization Services.
```

> A custom authorizer has to be configured on the Kafka Broker to take advantage of Authorization Services REST endpoints available on Keycloak, which provide a list of granted permissions on resources for authenticated users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A custom authorizer has to be configured on the Kafka Broker to take advantage of the Authorization Services REST endpoints available on Keycloak, which provide a list of granted permissions on resources for authenticated users.
```

> The list of grants (permissions) is first fetched during the first action after authenticated session is established by Kafka client, and then regularly refreshed in the background.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The list of grants (permissions) is fetched as the first action after an authenticated session is established by the Kafka client, and then regularly refreshed in the background.
```

> Grants are cached, and enforced locally on the Kafka Broker for each user session in order to provide fast authorization decisions. Because they are refreshed, any changes at Keycloak side are detected and enforced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Grants are cached and enforced locally on the Kafka Broker for each user session to provide fast authorization decisions. Because they are refreshed, any changes to the grants on the Keycloak server are detected and enforced.
```

> ## Starting Up the Pods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Starting Up the Pods
```

NOTE: TODO: Change the url to: https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-oauth/tree/master/examples/kubernetes

For this example we're using the kubernetes deployment scripts available at https://github.com/mstruk/strimzi-kafka-oauth/tree/examples/examples/kubernetes

NOTE: TODO: Change the url to: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-oauth/master

>     export ROOT=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mstruk/strimzi-kafka-oauth/examples

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,yaml]
----
export ROOT=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mstruk/strimzi-kafka-oauth/examples
----
```

> .Deploy the Postgres database for the Keycloak

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Deploy the Postgres database for Keycloak
```

>     kubectl apply -f $ROOT/examples/kubernetes/postgres-pvc.yaml
>     kubectl apply -f $ROOT/examples/kubernetes/postgres.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,yaml]
----
kubectl apply -f $ROOT/examples/kubernetes/postgres-pvc.yaml
kubectl apply -f $ROOT/examples/kubernetes/postgres.yaml
----
```

> .Deploy the Keycloak server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Deploy the Keycloak server
```

>     kubectl apply -f $ROOT/examples/kubernetes/keycloak-realms-configmap.yaml
>     kubectl apply -f $ROOT/examples/kubernetes/keycloak-postgres.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,yaml]
----
kubectl apply -f $ROOT/examples/kubernetes/keycloak-realms-configmap.yaml
kubectl apply -f $ROOT/examples/kubernetes/keycloak-postgres.yaml
----
```

> If your default namespace is not `myproject` but something else (for example, `default`), then use the following to deploy Keycloak:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your default namespace is not `myproject` (for example, `default`), use the following to deploy Keycloak:
```

>     curl -s $ROOT/examples/kubernetes/keycloak-postgres.yaml | sed -e "s#myproject#default#" | kubectl apply -f -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,yaml]
----
curl -s $ROOT/examples/kubernetes/keycloak-postgres.yaml | sed -e "s#myproject#default#" | kubectl apply -f -
----
```

.Deploy the minimal Kafka cluster

Here we assume that the Strimzi Cluster Operator has already been installed on your Kubernetes cluster.

>     kubectl apply -f $ROOT/examples/kubernetes/kafka-oauth-single-authz.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,yaml]
----
kubectl apply -f $ROOT/examples/kubernetes/kafka-oauth-single-authz.yaml
----
```

> ## Using the Keycloak Admin Console to Configure Authorization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Using the Keycloak Admin Console to Configure Authorization
```

You can login to the Keycloak Admin Console by creating a tunnel to the keycloak pod:

>     kubectl port-forward keycloak 8080

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,yaml]
----
kubectl port-forward keycloak 8080
----
```

> Now use your browser to connect to `http://localhost:8080/auth/admin` and use `admin` as both a username, and a password.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use your browser to connect to `http://localhost:8080/auth/admin` and use `admin` as username and password.
```

> In the upper left corner under the Keycloak icon you should see `Master` selected as the current realm.

Reviewer: I wonder if we're too detailed here. If the User interface changes, this content might fall out of sync.

Author: The UI hasn't changed for years so it's unlikely to change soon. It's essential that users have no doubt when following the instructions which due to Keycloak Admin Console UI being very complex is quite likely if not giving them detailed instructions.

Moving the mouse pointer over it should reveal two additional realms - `Demo` and `Kafka-authz`.

For this example we are interested in the `kafka-authz` realm.

> Selecting it will open the `Realm Settings` for the `kafka-authz` realm.

Reviewer: Could we drop the specifics from _In the upper left corner...to  ...for the `kafka-authz` realm._ and just say: _Locate the `kafka-authz` realm_?

Reviewer: Highlight ui text with *bold*

Author: Absolutely.

Author: In fact, it's quite a bit more tricky. Let me think a bit about this.

Author: I hope I addressed it adequately.

> Next to the `Realm Settings` there are other sections we are interested in - `Groups`, `Roles`, `Clients` and `Users`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the *Realm Settings* you can navigate to  *Groups*, *Roles*, *Clients* and *Users*.
```

> Under `Groups` we can see several groups that can be used to mark users as having some permissions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> Under `Groups` we can see several groups that can be used to mark users as having some permissions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under *Groups*, you can view groups that can be used to mark users as having some permissions.
```

Reviewer: I wonder if we should have inline headings (.title) for Groups, Users, Roles and Clients in this section.

> Groups are sets of users with name assigned. Typically they are used to geographically or organisationally compartmentalize users into organisations, organisational units, departments, and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Groups are sets of users with a name assigned. Typically, they are used to compartmentalize users into geographical, organizational or departmental units, and so on.
```

In Keycloak the groups can be stored in an LDAP identity provider.

> That makes it possible to make some user a member of some group - through a custom LDAP server admin UI for example, which grants them some permissions on Kafka resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That makes it possible to make a user a member of a group through a custom LDAP server admin user interface, for example, to grant them some permissions on Kafka resources.
```

> Under `Users`, click on the `View all users` button and you will see two users defined - `alice` and `bob`. `alice` is a member of the `ClusterManager Group`, and `bob` is a member of `ClusterManager-my-cluster Group`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under *Users*, when viewing all users you will see two users defined: `alice` and `bob`. `alice` is a member of the `ClusterManager Group`, and `bob` is a member of `ClusterManager-my-cluster Group`.
```

In Keycloak the users can be stored in an LDAP identity provider.

> Under `Roles` we can see several realm roles which can be used to mark users or clients as having some permissions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under *Roles*, you can view the realm roles to mark users or clients as having some permissions.
```

> Roles are a concept analogous to groups. They are usually used to 'tag' users as playing organisational roles and having permissions that pertain to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Roles are a concept analogous to groups. They are usually used to _tag_ users with organizational roles and have the requisite permissions.
```

> In Keycloak the roles cannot be stored in an LDAP identity provider - if that is your requirement then you should use groups instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Roles cannot be stored in an LDAP identity provider. If LDAP is a requirement, you could use groups instead.
```

> Under `Clients` we can see some additional clients configured - `kafka`, `kafka-cli`, `team-a-client`, `team-b-client`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under *Clients*, you can view the additional client configurations: `kafka`, `kafka-cli`, `team-a-client`, `team-b-client`.
```

> The client with client id `kafka` is used by Kafka Brokers to perform the necessary OAuth2 communication for access token validation,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The client with client id `kafka` is used by Kafka Brokers to perform the necessary OAuth 2.0 communication for access token validation,
```

> and to authenticate to other Kafka Broker instances using OAuth2 client authentication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and to authenticate to other Kafka Broker instances using OAuth 2.0 client authentication.
```

> This client also contains Authorization Services resource definitions, policies and authorization scopes used to perform authorization on the Kafka Brokers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This client also contains the Authorization Services resource definitions, policies and authorization scopes used to perform authorization on the Kafka Brokers.
```

The client with client id `kafka-cli` is a public client that can be used by the Kafka command line tools when authenticating with username and password to obtain an access token or a refresh token.

Clients `team-a-client`, and `team-b-client` are confidential clients representing services with partial access to certain Kafka topics.

> The authorization configuration is defined in the `kafka` client under `Authorization` tab.
> This tab becomes visible when `Authorization Enabled` is turned on under the `Settings` tab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The authorization configuration is defined in the `kafka` client from the *Authorization* tab, which becomes visible when *Authorization Enabled* is switched on from the *Settings* tab.
```

> ## Authorization Services - Resources, Authorization Scopes, Policies and Permissions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Authorization Services - Resources, Authorization Scopes, Policies and Permissions
```

Reviewer: This section reads like concepts and recommendations rather than part of the example. It seems like we're going over similar ground to _Mapping Keycloak Authorization Services to Kafka Model_

Author: That's true. It makes sense for a standalone example / tutorial, but maybe not when it's part of a document that in previous chapter explained all this.

> `Keycloak Authorization Services` use several concepts that together take part in defining, and applying access control to resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keycloak Authorization Services use authorization scopes, policies and permissions to define and apply access control to resources.
```

> `Resources` define _what_ we are protecting from unauthorized access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Resources define _what_ we are protecting from unauthorized access.
```

> Each resource can contain a list of `authorization scopes` - actions that are available on the resource, so that permission on a resource can be granted for one or more actions only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each resource can contain a list of authorization scopes - actions that are available on the resource, so that permission on a resource can be granted for one or more actions only.
```

> `Policies` define the groups of users we want to target with permissions. Users can be targeted based on group membership, assigned roles, or individually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Policies define the groups of users we want to target with permissions. Users can be targeted based on group membership, assigned roles, or individually.
```

> Finally, the `permissions` tie together specific `resources`, `action scopes` and `policies` to define that 'specific users U can perform certain actions A on the resource R'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, permissions tie together the specific resources, authorization scopes and policies that specify _users U can perform actions A on resource R_.
```

> You can read more about `Keycloak Authorization Services` on link:https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/authorization_services/index.html[project's web site], but note that the documentation there is focused primarily on using the Authorization Services to protect web resources, whereas here we're using it to protect access to Kafka.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about Keycloak Authorization Services, see {keycloak-authorization-services}, but note that the Authorization Services documentation is focused primarily on using the Authorization Services to protect web resources rather than access to Kafka.
```

Reviewer: We have an attribute for this link.

> If we take a look under the `Resources` sub-tab of `Authorization` tab, we'll see the list of resource definitions.
> These are resource specifiers - patterns in a specific format, that are used to target policies to specific resources.
> The format is quite simple. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When viewing resources from the Keycloak user interface you will see a list of resource definitions.
These are resource specifiers, patterns in a specific format that are used to target policies to specific resources.
For example:
```

> - `kafka-cluster:cluster-1,Topic:a_*`  ... targets only topics in kafka cluster 'cluster-1' with names starting with 'a_'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
----
`kafka-cluster:cluster-1,Topic:a_*`  
---- 
```

> If `kafka-cluster:XXX` segment is not present, the specifier targets any cluster.
> 
> - `Group:x_*` ... targets all consumer groups on any cluster with names starting with 'x_'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a cluster is not specified by name ( `kafka-cluster:cluster-1`), the specifier targets any cluster. For example, this pattern targets any cluster with a name starting  'x_':
----
Group:x_* 
----

```

> The possible resource types mirror the xref:kafka_authorization_model[Kafka authorization model] (`Topic`, `Group`, `Cluster`, ...).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The possible resource types, such as `Topic`, `Group` and `Cluster`, mirror the xref:kafka_authorization_model[Kafka authorization model].
```

> Under `Authorization Scopes` we can see a list of all the possible actions (Kafka permissions) that can be granted on resources of different types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Authorization Scopes* lists of all the possible actions (Kafka permissions) that can be granted on specific resources.
```

It requires some understanding of link:https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#resources_in_kafka[Kafka's permissions model] to know which of these make sense with which resource type.

> This list mirrors Kafka permissions and should be the same for any deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The list of actions mirrors Kafka permissions and is the same for any deployment.
```

> There is an link:https://raw.githubusercontent.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-oauth/master/oauth-keycloak-authorizer/etc/authorization-scopes.json[authorization-scopes.json] file containing the authorization scopes that can be imported, so that they do not have to be manually entered for every new `Authorization Services` enabled client.
> In order to import `authorization-scopes.json` into a new client, first make sure the new client is `Authorization Enabled` and saved. Then, click on the `Authorization` tab and use the `Import` to import the file. Afterwards, if you select the `Authorization Scopes` you will see the loaded scopes.
> For this example the authorization scopes have already been imported as part of the realm import.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rather than importing authorization scopes manually into every new client, you can use a link:https://raw.githubusercontent.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-oauth/master/oauth-keycloak-authorizer/etc/authorization-scopes.json[authorization-scopes.json] file.

You must make sure that the client is enabled in Keycloak for Authorization Services. After which, you can import a JSON file from the *Authorization* tab. You can see the loaded scopes from the *Authorization Scopes* page.

For this example the authorization scopes have already been imported as part of the realm import.
```

> Under the `Policies` sub-tab there are filters that match sets of users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *Policies* page has filters that match sets of users.
```

Users can be explicitly listed, or they can be matched based on the Roles, or Groups they are assigned.

> Policies can even be programmatically defined using JavaScript where logic can take into account the context of the client session - for example, client ip (that is client ip of the Kafka client).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Policies can even be defined programmatically using JavaScript so the logic considers the context of the client session, such as the IP of a Kafka client.
```

> Then, finally, there is the `Permissions` sub-tab, which defines 'role bindings' where `resources`, `authorization scopes` and `policies` are tied together to apply a set of permissions on specific resources for certain users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *Permissions* tab defines role bindings that associate resources, authorization scopes and policies for applying a set of permissions on specific resources for certain users.
```

> Each `permission` definition can have a nice descriptive name which can make it very clear what kind of access is granted to which users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use a clear, descriptive name for each permission definition so that it is obvious what kind of access is granted to which users.
```

For example:

>     Dev Team A can write to topics that start with x_ on any cluster
> 
>     Dev Team B can read from topics that start with x_ on any cluster
>     Dev Team B can update consumer group offsets that start with x_ on any cluster
> 
>     ClusterManager of my-cluster Group has full access to cluster config on my-cluster
>     ClusterManager of my-cluster Group has full access to consumer groups on my-cluster
>     ClusterManager of my-cluster Group has full access to topics on my-cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
----
Dev Team A can write to topics that start with x_ on any cluster
Dev Team B can read from topics that start with x_ on any cluster
Dev Team B can update consumer group offsets that start with x_ on any cluster
ClusterManager of my-cluster Group has full access to cluster config on my-cluster
ClusterManager of my-cluster Group has full access to consumer groups on my-cluster
ClusterManager of my-cluster Group has full access to topics on my-cluster
```

> If we take a closer look at the `Dev Team A can write ...` permission definition, we see that it combines a resource called `Topic:x_*`, scopes `Describe` and `Write`, and `Dev Team A` policy.
> If we click on the `Dev Team A` policy, we see that it matches all users that have a realm role called `Dev Team A`.
> 
> Similarly, the `Dev Team B ...` permissions perform matching using the `Dev Team B` policy which also uses realm role to match allowed users - in this case those with realm role `Dev Team B`.
> The `Dev Team B ...` permissions grant users `Describe` and `Read` on `Topic:x_*`, and `Group:x_*` resources, effectively giving matching users and clients the ability to read from topics, and update the consumed offsets for topics and consumer groups that have names starting with 'x_'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Dev Team A can write to topics that start with x_ on any cluster` combines a resource called `Topic:x_*`, scopes `Describe` and `Write`, and `Dev Team A` policy. The `Dev Team A` policy matches all users that have a realm role called `Dev Team A`.

`Dev Team B can read from topics that start with x_ on any cluster` combines `Topic:x_*`, and `Group:x_*` resources, scopes `Describe` and `Read`, and `Dev Team B` policy. The `Dev Team A` policy matches all users that have a realm role called `Dev Team B`. Matching users and clients have the ability to read from topics, and update the consumed offsets for topics and consumer groups that have names starting with 'x_'.
```

> ## Targeting Permissions - Clients and Roles vs. Users and Groups

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Targeting permissions
```

> 

Reviewer: Whether you use group or role policies to control access is dependent on the type of access. Generally, you will use roles for client access, and groups for user access.

Author: I don't think this is quite true. Users may easily decide to not use groups at all, and to only use roles for all types of accounts.

> In Keycloak, confidential clients with 'service accounts' enabled can authenticate to the server in their own name using a clientId and a secret.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Keycloak, confidential clients with service accounts enabled can authenticate to the server in their own name using a client ID and a secret.
```

This is convenient for microservices which typically act in their own name, and not as agents of a particular user (like a web site would, for example).
Service accounts can have roles assigned like regular users.
They cannot, however, have groups assigned.

> As a consequence, if you want to target permissions to microservices using service accounts, you cannot use Group policies, and should instead use Role policies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a consequence, if you want to target permissions to microservices using service accounts, you cannot use group policies, and should instead use role policies.
```

> Or, thinking about it another way, if you want to limit certain permissions only to regular user accounts where authentication with username and password is required, you can achieve that as a side effect of using the Group policies, rather than the Role policies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conversely, if you want to limit certain permissions only to regular user accounts where authentication with username and password is required, you can achieve that as a side effect of using the group policies, rather than the role policies.
```

> That's what we see used in `permissions` that start with 'ClusterManager'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That is what is used for permissions that start with 'ClusterManager'.
```

Performing cluster management is usually done interactively - in person - using CLI tools.

> It makes sense to require the user to log-in, before using the resulting access token to authenticate to the Kafka Broker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It makes sense to require the user to log in, before using the resulting access token to authenticate to the Kafka Broker.
```

> In this case the access token represents the specific user, rather than the client application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, the access token represents the specific user, rather than the client application.
```

> ## Authorization in Action Using CLI Clients

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Authorization in Action Using CLI Clients
```

> A note of caution - this example uses the latest version of Keycloak, and relies on bugfixes of issues in some older versions.
> Let's make sure the Authorization rules have been properly imported when the Keycloak was started.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before trying any new authorization configuration, make sure that authorization rules have been properly imported when Keycloak starts.
```

Reviewer: Can we drop this section then? Concerned about future-proofing the content

Author: Ok. Let's drop it then.

Author: Or what if we just do it like this:
```suggestion
Make sure that authorization rules have been properly imported.
```

> Under `Clients` / `kafka` / `Authorization` / `Settings` make sure the `Decision Strategy` is set to `Affirmative`, and NOT to `Unanimous`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From menu:Clients[kafka>Authorization>Settings] make sure that *Decision Strategy* is set to *Affirmative*, and NOT to *Unanimous*.
```

> Click on other tabs and make sure there are some resources, authorization claims, policies and permissions defined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Navigate in Keycloak to check that the expected resources, authorization claims, policies and permissions are defined.
```

> With configuration now in place, let's create some topics, use a producer, a consumer, and try to perform some management operations using different user and service accounts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the configuration in place, access to Kafka can be checked by using a producer and consumer, and creating topics using different user and service accounts.
```

> First, we run a new interactive pod container using a Strimzi Kafka image which we use to connect to the already running Kafka broker.
> 
>     kubectl run -ti --rm --restart=Never --image=quay.io/strimzi/kafka:latest-kafka-2.6.0 kafka-cli -- /bin/sh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, a new interactive pod container is run using a Strimzi Kafka image to connect to a running Kafka broker.

[source,shell]
----
kubectl run -ti --rm --restart=Never --image=quay.io/strimzi/kafka:latest-kafka-2.6.0 kafka-cli -- /bin/sh
----
```

Reviewer: Would this section be okay for a downstream doc? Are we expecting people to step through the example or is it intended for reference? Impact on testing.

> The first time you run this, the `kubectl` might timeout waiting on the image to be downloaded, but your subsequent attempts may result in AlreadyExists error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `kubectl` times out waiting on the image download, subsequent attempts may result in an _AlreadyExists_ error. 
```

Reviewer: Maybe we should say whether to error can be ignored or what is the workaround.

> You can attach to the existing pod by running:
> 
>     kubectl attach -ti kafka-cli

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can attach to the existing pod by running:

[source,shell]
----
kubectl attach -ti kafka-cli
----
```

> Let's try to produce some messages as client `team-a-client`.
> 
> First, we prepare a Kafka client configuration file with authentication parameters.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To produce messages as client `team-a-client`, we prepare a Kafka client configuration file with authentication parameters.

```

> ```
> cat > /tmp/team-a-client.properties << EOF
> security.protocol=SASL_PLAINTEXT
> sasl.mechanism=OAUTHBEARER
> sasl.jaas.config=org.apache.kafka.common.security.oauthbearer.OAuthBearerLoginModule required \
>   oauth.client.id="team-a-client" \
>   oauth.client.secret="team-a-client-secret" \
>   oauth.token.endpoint.uri="http://keycloak:8080/auth/realms/kafka-authz/protocol/openid-connect/token" ;
> sasl.login.callback.handler.class=io.strimzi.kafka.oauth.client.JaasClientOauthLoginCallbackHandler
> EOF
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,shell]
----
cat > /tmp/team-a-client.properties << EOF
security.protocol=SASL_PLAINTEXT
sasl.mechanism=OAUTHBEARER
sasl.jaas.config=org.apache.kafka.common.security.oauthbearer.OAuthBearerLoginModule required \
  oauth.client.id="team-a-client" \
  oauth.client.secret="team-a-client-secret" \
  oauth.token.endpoint.uri="http://keycloak:8080/auth/realms/kafka-authz/protocol/openid-connect/token" ;
sasl.login.callback.handler.class=io.strimzi.kafka.oauth.client.JaasClientOauthLoginCallbackHandler
EOF
----
```

> In the Keycloak Console you can find which roles are assigned to the `team-a-client` service account, by selecting `team-a-client` in the `Clients` section.
> and then opening the `Service Account Roles` tab for the client.
> You should see the `Dev Team A` realm role assigned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The roles assigned to a client, such as the `Dev Team A` realm role assigned to the `team-a-client` service account, are presented in Keycloak on the  *Service Account Roles* tab from *Clients*.
```

> We can now use this configuration with Kafka's CLI tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can use this configuration with Kafka's CLI tools to produce and consume messages, and perform other administration tasks.
```

> ### Producing the Messages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Producing the Messages
```

> Let's try to produce some messages to topic 'my-topic':
> 
> ```
> bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic my-topic \
>   --producer.config=/tmp/team-a-client.properties
> First message
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `team-a-client` configuration is used to produce messages to topic 'my-topic':

[source,shell,subs=+quotes]
----
bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic my-topic \
  --producer.config=/tmp/team-a-client.properties
First message
----
```

> When we press `Enter` to push the first message we receive `Not authorized to access topics: [my-topic]` error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An `Not authorized to access topics: [my-topic]` error is returned when trying to push the first message.
```

> `team-a-client` has a `Dev Team A` role which gives it permissions to do anything on topics that start with 'a_', and only write to topics that start with 'x_'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`team-a-client` has a `Dev Team A` role that gives it permission to perform any supported actions on topics that start with `a_`, but can only write to topics that start with `x_`.
```

> The topic named `my-topic` matches neither of those.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The topic named `my-topic` matches neither of those rules.
```

> Use CTRL-C to exit the CLI application, and let's try to write to topic `a_messages`.
> 
> ```
> bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic a_messages \
>   --producer.config /tmp/team-a-client.properties
> First message
> Second message
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `team-a-client` configuration is then used to produce messages to topic `a_messages`.

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic a_messages \
  --producer.config /tmp/team-a-client.properties
First message
Second message
----
```

> Although we can see some unrelated warnings, looking at the Kafka container log there is DEBUG level output saying 'Authorization GRANTED'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The messages are pushed out successfully, and in the Kafka container log there is DEBUG level output saying `Authorization GRANTED`.
```

> Use CTRL-C to exit the CLI application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer: Let's return it then. I assumed we'd be doing this between steps

You can see the Kafka container log by running:

>     kubectl logs my-cluster-kafka-0 -f

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can see the Kafka container log by running:

[source,shell]
----
kubectl logs my-cluster-kafka-0 -f
----

> ### Consuming the Messages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Consuming messages with authorized access
```

Let's now try to consume the messages we have produced.

    bin/kafka-console-consumer.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic a_messages \

>       --from-beginning --consumer.config /tmp/team-a-client.properties

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `team-a-client` configuration is used to consumer messages from topic `a_messages`:

[source,shell,subs=+quotes]
----
bin/kafka-console-consumer.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic a_messages \
  --from-beginning --consumer.config /tmp/team-a-client.properties
----

> This gives us an error like: `Not authorized to access group: console-consumer-55841`.
> 
> The reason is that we have to override the default consumer group name - `Dev Team A` only has access to consumer groups that have names starting with 'a_'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An error is returned as the `Dev Team A` role for `team-a-client` only has access to consumer groups that have names starting with `a_`.
```

> Let's set custom consumer group name that starts with 'a_'
> 
>     bin/kafka-console-consumer.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic a_messages \
>       --from-beginning --consumer.config /tmp/team-a-client.properties --group a_consumer_group_1
> 
> We should now receive all the messages for the 'a_messages' topic, after which the client blocks waiting for more messages.
> 
> Use CTRL-C to exit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `team-a-client` configuration is then used to consume messages when specifying a custom consumer group with a name that starts with `a_`:

[source,shell,subs=+quotes]
----
bin/kafka-console-consumer.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic a_messages \
  --from-beginning --consumer.config /tmp/team-a-client.properties --group a_consumer_group_1
----

This time the consumer receives all the messages from the `a_messages` topic.
```

> ### Using Kafka's CLI Administration Tools

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Administering Kafka with authorized access
```

> Let's now list the topics:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `team-a-client` configuration is used in administrative operations.
```

>     bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config /tmp/team-a-client.properties --list
> 
> We get one topic listed: `a_messages`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Listing topics returns the `a_messages` topic.

[source,shell,subs=+quotes]
----
bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config /tmp/team-a-client.properties --list
----    
```

> Let's try and list the consumer groups:
> 
>     bin/kafka-consumer-groups.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config /tmp/team-a-client.properties --list
> 
> Similarly to listing topics, we get one consumer group listed: `a_consumer_group_1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Listing consumer groups returns the `a_consumer_group_1` consumer group.

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-consumer-groups.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config /tmp/team-a-client.properties --list
----
```

> There are more CLI administrative tools. For example we can try to get the default cluster configuration:
> 
>     bin/kafka-configs.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config /tmp/team-a-client.properties \
>       --entity-type brokers --describe --entity-default
> 
> But that will fail with `Cluster authorization failed.` error, because this operation requires cluster level permissions which `team-a-client` does not have.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fetching the default cluster configuration fails cluster authorization, because the operation requires cluster level permissions that `team-a-client` does not have.

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-configs.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config /tmp/team-a-client.properties \
  --entity-type brokers --describe --entity-default
----

But that will fail with `Cluster authorization failed.` error, because this operation requires cluster level permissions which `team-a-client` does not have.
```

// Module included in the following module:
//
// con-oauth-authorization-keycloak-authorization-services.adoc

[id='con-oauth-authorization-keycloak-example_{context}']
= Keycloak Authorization Services Example

This is an end-to-end example of using Keycloak Authorization Services to configure authorization rules for use with `keycloak` authorization in Strimzi.

> The example starts by deploying the Keycloak server with pre-configured realm, requiring no additional configuration.

Author: ```suggestion
The example starts by deploying the Keycloak server with pre-configured realms, requiring no additional configuration.
```

We deploy the Kafka cluster configured to use one of the pre-configured realms.

> We connect to the Keycloak Admin Console and demonstrate the sections of the UI where authorizations rules are configured.

Author: ```suggestion
We connect to the Keycloak Admin Console and demonstrate the sections of the user interface where authorizations rules are configured.
```

We use Kafka CLI client tools with different personal and service accounts to demonstrate limited access based on the permissions granted to different accounts.

## Token Based Authorization with Keycloak Authorization Services

> Once the Kafka Broker has obtained an access token by using Strimzi Kafka OAuth for authentication, it is possible to use centrally managed authorization rules to enforce access restrictions onto Kafka Clients.

Author: ```suggestion
Once the Kafka Broker has obtained an access token by using [Strimzi Kafka OAuth](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-oauth) for authentication, it is possible to use centrally managed authorization rules to enforce access restrictions onto Kafka Clients.
```

Author: Here I refer to the project ... I made it more clear by turning it into a web link.

== Token-based authorization with Keycloak Authorization Services

Once the Kafka Broker has obtained an access token by using `oauth` authentication, it is possible to use centrally managed authorization rules to enforce access restrictions onto Kafka Clients.
For this, Strimzi Kafka Operator comes with `keycloak` authorization which uses Keycloak Authorization Services to centrally manage permissions.

When using `keycloak` authorization, a custom authorizer is configured on the Kafka broker that uses Authorization Services REST endpoints available on Keycloak, which provide a list of granted permissions on resources for authenticated users.
The list of grants (permissions) is fetched as the first action after an authenticated session is established by the Kafka client, and then regularly refreshed in the background.
Grants are cached and enforced locally on the Kafka broker for each user session to provide fast authorization decisions. Because they are refreshed, any changes to the grants on the Keycloak server are detected and enforced.

> == Starting the pods

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure we want to have this in the documentation. The installation should just link to Keycloak docs. That makes it clear that it is their responsibility. I think this docs should just start from the assumption that the user installed Keycloak with whatever their preferred method is.

And even if others think it should be here, it should definitely:
* not point to master but needs to point to a tag with the release used in given Strimzi release.
* Have a clear warning that this is not any secure production deployment.

Author: This is an example of integration of Kafka with Keycloak, and the `yaml`s are specifically configured to automatically import example realms that the example needs in order to work. These `yaml`s are part of `strimzi-kafka-oauth` examples. If you have no ready-made way to set up the example as it was intended, then this whole chapter is quite useless. And Strimzi example is not a concern of the Keycloak project. Also, the example chapter is really the reason for this PR. There is no Kubernetes based example anywhere else.

Pointing to a release tag is a great idea. Is there a mechanism in place that allows this, or is it something we have to develop?

We can also add a warning about this being just an insecure example, sure.

Reviewer 2: > This is an example of integration of Kafka with Keycloak, and the yamls are specifically configured to automatically import example realms that the example needs in order to work.

I'm not sure this helps to be honest. Because you give them ready to use environment to play with it, but then you tell them that this is for nothing else then playing. So they would need to deploy it differently and then they would not know how to import the things?

> Pointing to a release tag is a great idea. Is there a mechanism in place that allows this, or is it something we have to develop?

There is variable `oauth-artifact-version` which should have the OAuth library version (which is the same as GitHub tag).

> We can also add a warning about this being just an insecure example, sure.

Not just insecure, but mainly not production ready. So I guess the warning should be for both.

Reviewer 2: @mstruk Can you look at this so that we can merge this?

Author: There's several issues mentioned here:
- this content should in your opinion not be here - there should be a pointer to Keycloak documentation and then just instructions on how to import the realms. Problem: Importing the realm is only possible by mounting the realm file in yaml and deploying a new pod definition - it can not be done through UI on the existing running Keycloak instance because all the passwords, and secrets are lost in that case. But then the existing instructions do just that.
- need to use the oauth-artifact-version variable
- add warnings

Would addressing the last two issues be good enough?

Reviewer 2: I guess I gave up on the first point I guess. WDYT @strimzi/maintainers?

The second and third point should be fixed.

Author: Added the variables, and a caution note.

That is what is used for permissions that start with `ClusterManager`.
Performing cluster management is usually done interactively - in person - using CLI tools.
It makes sense to require the user to log in, before using the resulting access token to authenticate to the Kafka Broker.
In this case, the access token represents the specific user, rather than the client application.

== Authorization in action using CLI clients

Make sure that authorization rules have been properly imported.

From menu:Clients[kafka>Authorization>Settings] make sure that *Decision Strategy* is set to *Affirmative*, and NOT to *Unanimous*.
Navigate in Keycloak to check that the expected resources, authorization claims, policies and permissions are defined.

With the configuration in place, we can check access to Kafka by using a producer and consumer to create topics using different user and service accounts.

First, a new interactive pod container is run using a Strimzi Kafka image to connect to a running Kafka broker.

[source,shell]
----

> kubectl run -ti --rm --restart=Never --image=quay.io/strimzi/kafka:latest-kafka-2.6.0 kafka-cli -- /bin/sh

Reviewer 2: Is this replaced with the right tag at release time? I think it needs to enable replacing variables in the snipper and use some variable which is fixed at release time to create stabel documentation.

Author: Do we have a mechanism like that for the docs?

Reviewer 2: There is variable `DockerKafkaImageCurrent` which this. So you need to enable the variable substitution and use something like this:

```
kubectl run -ti --rm --restart=Never --image={DockerKafkaImageCurrent}
```

Reviewer 2: @mstruk Can you look at this so that we can merge this?

Author: Ok, here it's just replacing the constants with a variable.

// Module included in the following module:
//
// con-oauth-authorization-keycloak-authorization-services.adoc

[id='con-oauth-authorization-keycloak-example_{context}']
= Example authorization rules configuration using Authorization Services

This is an end-to-end example of using Keycloak Authorization Services to configure authorization rules for use with `keycloak` authorization in Strimzi.
The example starts by deploying the Keycloak server with pre-configured realms, requiring no additional configuration.
We deploy the Kafka cluster configured to use one of the pre-configured realms.

> We connect to the Keycloak Admin Console and demonstrate the sections of the user interface where authorizations rules are configured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We then connect to the Keycloak Admin Console and demonstrate the sections of the user interface where authorizations rules are configured.
```

> We connect to the Keycloak Admin Console and demonstrate the sections of the user interface where authorizations rules are configured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, we connect to the Keycloak Admin Console and demonstrate the sections of the user interface where authorizations rules are configured.
```

Reviewer: These might work better as bullets

Author: I leave that to you :)

We use Kafka CLI client tools with different personal and service accounts to demonstrate limited access based on the permissions granted to different accounts.

> == Token Based Authorization with Keycloak Authorization Services

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Token-based authorization with Keycloak Authorization Services
```

Once the Kafka Broker has obtained an access token by using `oauth` authentication, it is possible to use centrally managed authorization rules to enforce access restrictions onto Kafka Clients.
For this, Strimzi Kafka Operator comes with `keycloak` authorization which uses Keycloak Authorization Services to centrally manage permissions.

> When using `keycloak` authorization a custom authorizer is configured on the Kafka Broker that uses Authorization Services REST endpoints available on Keycloak, which provide a list of granted permissions on resources for authenticated users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using `keycloak` authorization, a custom authorizer is configured on the Kafka broker that uses Authorization Services REST endpoints available on Keycloak, which provide a list of granted permissions on resources for authenticated users.
```

The list of grants (permissions) is fetched as the first action after an authenticated session is established by the Kafka client, and then regularly refreshed in the background.

> Grants are cached and enforced locally on the Kafka Broker for each user session to provide fast authorization decisions. Because they are refreshed, any changes to the grants on the Keycloak server are detected and enforced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Grants are cached and enforced locally on the Kafka broker for each user session to provide fast authorization decisions. Because they are refreshed, any changes to the grants on the Keycloak server are detected and enforced.
```

> == Starting Up the Pods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Starting the pods
```

> For this example we're using the kubernetes deployment scripts available at https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-oauth/tree/master/examples/kubernetes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this example, we're using the kubernetes deployment scripts available at https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-oauth/tree/master/examples/kubernetes
```

[source,yaml]
----
export ROOT=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-oauth/master
----

.Deploy the Postgres database for Keycloak

[source,yaml]
----
kubectl apply -f $ROOT/examples/kubernetes/postgres-pvc.yaml
kubectl apply -f $ROOT/examples/kubernetes/postgres.yaml
----

.Deploy the Keycloak server

[source,yaml]
----
kubectl apply -f $ROOT/examples/kubernetes/keycloak-realms-configmap.yaml
kubectl apply -f $ROOT/examples/kubernetes/keycloak-postgres.yaml
----

If your default namespace is not `myproject` (for example, `default`), use the following to deploy Keycloak:

[source,yaml]
----
curl -s $ROOT/examples/kubernetes/keycloak-postgres.yaml | sed -e "s#myproject#default#" | kubectl apply -f -
----

.Deploy the minimal Kafka cluster

> Here we assume that the Strimzi Cluster Operator has already been installed on your Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we assume that the Strimzi Cluster Operator has already been installed on the Kubernetes cluster.
```

[source,yaml]
----
kubectl apply -f $ROOT/examples/kubernetes/kafka-oauth-single-authz.yaml
----

== Using the Keycloak Admin Console to configure authorization

> You can login to the Keycloak Admin Console by creating a tunnel to the keycloak pod:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We login to the Keycloak Admin Console by creating a tunnel to the keycloak pod:
```

[source,yaml]
----
kubectl port-forward keycloak 8080
----

> Use your browser to connect to `http://localhost:8080/auth/admin` and use `admin` as username and password.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use your browser to connect to `\http://localhost:8080/auth/admin` and use `admin` as username and password.
```

Author: I suppose this backslash becomes invisible when rendered but prevents some unwanted rendering that would otherwise occur?

> Use your browser to connect to `http://localhost:8080/auth/admin` and use `admin` as username and password.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then we use a browser to connect to `http://localhost:8080/auth/admin` using `admin` as username and password.
```

The default view usually displays the *Master* realm.
For this example we are interested in the `kafka-authz` realm, which you can select in the upper left corner.

> Initially the *Realm Settings* section is selected, but you can navigate to  *Groups*, *Roles*, *Clients* and *Users*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Initially, the *Realm Settings* section is selected, but you can navigate to  *Groups*, *Roles*, *Clients* and *Users*.
```

Under *Groups*, you can view groups to mark users as having some permissions.
Groups are sets of users with a name assigned. Typically, they are used to compartmentalize users into geographical, organizational or departmental units, and so on.

> In Keycloak the groups can be stored in an LDAP identity provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Keycloak, groups can be stored in an LDAP identity provider.
```

That makes it possible to make a user a member of a group through a custom LDAP server admin user interface, for example, to grant them some permissions on Kafka resources.

> Under *Users*, when viewing all users you will see two users defined: `alice` and `bob`. `alice` is a member of the `ClusterManager Group`, and `bob` is a member of `ClusterManager-my-cluster Group`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under *Users*, when viewing all defined users we see `alice` and `bob`. `alice` is a member of the `ClusterManager Group`, and `bob` is a member of `ClusterManager-my-cluster Group`.
```

> In Keycloak the users can be stored in an LDAP identity provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Keycloak, users can be stored in an LDAP identity provider.
```

Under *Roles*, you can view the realm roles to mark users or clients as having some permissions.
Roles are a concept analogous to groups. They are usually used to _tag_ users with organizational roles and have the requisite permissions.
Roles cannot be stored in an LDAP identity provider. If LDAP is a requirement, you could use groups instead.

> Under *Clients*, you can view the additional client configurations: `kafka`, `kafka-cli`, `team-a-client`, `team-b-client`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under *Clients*, you can view the additional client configurations. For this eaxmple,  `kafka`, `kafka-cli`, `team-a-client`, `team-b-client` are configured.
```

The client with client id `kafka` is used by Kafka Brokers to perform the necessary OAuth 2.0 communication for access token validation,
and to authenticate to other Kafka Broker instances using OAuth 2.0 client authentication.
This client also contains the Authorization Services resource definitions, policies and authorization scopes used to perform authorization on the Kafka Brokers.

The client with client id `kafka-cli` is a public client that can be used by the Kafka command line tools when authenticating with username and password to obtain an access token or a refresh token.

Clients `team-a-client`, and `team-b-client` are confidential clients representing services with partial access to certain Kafka topics.

The authorization configuration is defined in the `kafka` client from the *Authorization* tab, which becomes visible when *Authorization Enabled* is switched on from the *Settings* tab.

== Defining Authorization Services for access control

> Keycloak Authorization Services use authorization scopes, policies and permissions to define and apply access control to resources as explained in xref:keycloak_authorization_services_model_for_managing_permissions(one of the previous chapters).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keycloak Authorization Services use authorization scopes, policies and permissions to define and apply access control to resources, as explained in xref:keycloak_authorization_services_model_for_managing_permissions[].
```

> Under *Authorization* / *Permissions* of `kafka` client you can see already granted permissions that make use of *Resources* and *Policies* defined under the other tabs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From *Authorization* / *Permissions* you can see the granted permissions that use resources and policies defined from other *Resources* and *Policies* tabs. For example, `kafka` client has the following permissions:
```

In Keycloak, confidential clients with service accounts enabled can authenticate to the server in their own name using a client ID and a secret.
This is convenient for microservices which typically act in their own name, and not as agents of a particular user (like a web site would, for example).
Service accounts can have roles assigned like regular users.
They cannot, however, have groups assigned.
As a consequence, if you want to target permissions to microservices using service accounts, you cannot use group policies, and should instead use role policies.
Conversely, if you want to limit certain permissions only to regular user accounts where authentication with username and password is required, you can achieve that as a side effect of using the group policies, rather than the role policies.
That is what is used for permissions that start with `ClusterManager`.
Performing cluster management is usually done interactively - in person - using CLI tools.
It makes sense to require the user to log in, before using the resulting access token to authenticate to the Kafka Broker.
In this case, the access token represents the specific user, rather than the client application.

> == Authorization in Action Using CLI Clients

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Authorization in action Using CLI Clients
```

A note of caution - this example uses the latest version of Keycloak, and relies on bugfixes of issues in some older versions.
Let's make sure the Authorization rules have been properly imported when the Keycloak was started.

From menu:Clients[kafka>Authorization>Settings] make sure that *Decision Strategy* is set to *Affirmative*, and NOT to *Unanimous*.
Navigate in Keycloak to check that the expected resources, authorization claims, policies and permissions are defined.

With the configuration in place, we can check access to Kafka by using a producer and consumer to create topics using different user and service accounts.

First, a new interactive pod container is run using a Strimzi Kafka image to connect to a running Kafka broker.

[source,shell]
----
kubectl run -ti --rm --restart=Never --image=quay.io/strimzi/kafka:latest-kafka-2.6.0 kafka-cli -- /bin/sh
----

NOTE: If `kubectl` times out waiting on the image download, subsequent attempts may result in an _AlreadyExists_ error. 

You can attach to the existing pod by running:

[source,shell]
----
kubectl attach -ti kafka-cli
----

> To produce messages as client `team-a-client`, we prepare a Kafka client configuration file with authentication parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To produce messages as client `team-a-client`, we prepare a Kafka client configuration file with authentication parameters:
```

  oauth.token.endpoint.uri="http://keycloak:8080/auth/realms/kafka-authz/protocol/openid-connect/token" ;
sasl.login.callback.handler.class=io.strimzi.kafka.oauth.client.JaasClientOauthLoginCallbackHandler
EOF
----

The roles assigned to a client, such as the `Dev Team A` realm role assigned to the `team-a-client` service account, are presented in Keycloak on the  *Service Account Roles* tab from *Clients*.

We can use this configuration from the Kafka CLI to produce and consume messages, and perform other administration tasks.

.Producing messages with authorized access

The `team-a-client` configuration is used to produce messages to topic `my-topic`:

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic my-topic \
  --producer.config=/tmp/team-a-client.properties
First message
----

A `Not authorized to access topics: [my-topic]` error is returned when trying to push the first message.

`team-a-client` has a `Dev Team A` role that gives it permission to perform any supported actions on topics that start with `a_`, but can only write to topics that start with `x_`.
The topic named `my-topic` matches neither of those rules.

> The `team-a-client` configuration is then used to produce messages to topic `a_messages`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `team-a-client` configuration is then used to produce messages to topic `a_messages`:
```

Use CTRL-C to exit the CLI application.

You can see the Kafka container log by running:

[source,shell]
kubectl logs my-cluster-kafka-0 -f

.Consuming messages with authorized access

The `team-a-client` configuration is used to consume messages from topic `a_messages`:

[source,shell,subs=+quotes]
----
bin/kafka-console-consumer.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic a_messages \
  --from-beginning --consumer.config /tmp/team-a-client.properties
----

An error is returned as the `Dev Team A` role for `team-a-client` only has access to consumer groups that have names starting with `a_`.
The `team-a-client` configuration is then used to consume messages when specifying a custom consumer group with a name that starts with `a_`:

[source,shell,subs=+quotes]
----
bin/kafka-console-consumer.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic a_messages \
  --from-beginning --consumer.config /tmp/team-a-client.properties --group a_consumer_group_1
----

This time the consumer receives all the messages from the `a_messages` topic.

.Administering Kafka with authorized access

The `team-a-client` configuration is used in administrative operations.

> Listing topics returns the `a_messages` topic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Listing topics returns the `a_messages` topic:
```

> Listing topics returns the `a_messages` topic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Listing topics returns the `a_messages` topic:
```

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config /tmp/team-a-client.properties --list
----    

> Listing consumer groups returns the `a_consumer_group_1` consumer group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Listing consumer groups returns the `a_consumer_group_1` consumer group:
```

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-consumer-groups.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config /tmp/team-a-client.properties --list
----

> Fetching the default cluster configuration fails cluster authorization, because the operation requires cluster level permissions that `team-a-client` does not have.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fetching the default cluster configuration fails cluster authorization, because the operation requires cluster level permissions that `team-a-client` does not have:
```

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-configs.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config /tmp/team-a-client.properties \
  --entity-type brokers --describe --entity-default
----

> . Using clients with different permissions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Using clients with different permissions
```

> As with `team-a-client`, we prepare a Kafka client configuration file with authentication parameters for `team-b-client`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As with `team-a-client`, we prepare a Kafka client configuration file with authentication parameters for `team-b-client`:
```

EOF
----

The `team-b-client` client configuration includes a `Dev Team B` realm role and permissions that start with `Dev Team B ...`. These match the users and service accounts that have the `Dev Team B` realm role assigned to them.
The `Dev Team B` users have full access to topics beginning with `b_` on the Kafka cluster `my-cluster`, the name of the designated cluster, and read access on topics that start with `x_`.

The `team-b-client` configuration is used to produce messages to topic `a_messages`:

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic a_messages \
  --producer.config /tmp/team-b-client.properties
Message 1
----

A `Not authorized to access topics: [a_messages]` error is returned when trying to push the first message, as expected, so we switch to topic `b_messages`:

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic b_messages \
  --producer.config /tmp/team-b-client.properties
Message 1
Message 2
Message 3
----

Producing messages to topic `b_messages` is authorized and successful.

> We switch again, but this time to topic that `team-b-client` can only read from, topic `x_messages`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We switch again, but this time to a topic that `team-b-client` can only read from, topic `x_messages`:
```

  --producer.config /tmp/team-a-client.properties
Message 1
----

A `Not authorized to access topics: [x_messages]` error is returned again. Though `team-a-client` can write to the `x_messages` topic, it it does not have a permission to create a topic if it does not yet exist. 

Before `team-a-client` can write to the `x_messages` topic, a admin _power user_ must create it with the correct configuration, such as the number of partitions and replicas.

.Managing Kafka with an authorized admin

Admin user `bob` is created with full access to manage everything on the Kafka cluster `my-cluster`.

Helper scripts are used to authenticate to the `keycloak` instance.

The following scripts are downloaded to `/tmp` dir and made executable:

[source,shell]
----
curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-oauth/master/examples/docker/kafka-oauth-strimzi/kafka/oauth.sh -s > /tmp/oauth.sh
   chmod +x /tmp/oauth.sh

curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-oauth/master/examples/docker/kafka-oauth-strimzi/kafka/jwt.sh -s > /tmp/jwt.sh
   chmod +x /tmp/jwt.sh
----

> User `bob` authenticates to the Keycloak server with his username and password to get a refresh token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
User `bob` authenticates to the Keycloak server with his username and password to get a refresh token:
```

[source,shell]
----
cat > /tmp/bob.properties << EOF
security.protocol=SASL_PLAINTEXT
sasl.mechanism=OAUTHBEARER
sasl.jaas.config=org.apache.kafka.common.security.oauthbearer.OAuthBearerLoginModule required \
  oauth.refresh.token="$REFRESH_TOKEN" \
  oauth.client.id="kafka-cli" \
  oauth.token.endpoint.uri="http://keycloak:8080/auth/realms/kafka-authz/protocol/openid-connect/token" ;
sasl.login.callback.handler.class=io.strimzi.kafka.oauth.client.JaasClientOauthLoginCallbackHandler
EOF
----

The `kafka-cli` public client is used for the `oauth.client.id` in the `sasl.jaas.config`.
Since that is a public client it does not require a Secret.
We can use this because we authenticate with a token directly. In this case, the refresh token requests an access token behind the scenes, which is then sent to the Kafka broker for authentication. The refresh token has already been authenticated.

User `bob` has permission to create the `x_messages` topic:

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config /tmp/bob.properties \
  --topic x_messages --create --replication-factor 1 --partitions 1
----

> User `bob` can list the topic, but `team-a-client` and `team-b-client` cannot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
User `bob` can list the topic, but `team-a-client` and `team-b-client` cannot:
```

Message 5
----

However, due to its Keycloak settings `team-b-client` can consume messages from the `x_messages` topic:

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-console-consumer.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic x_messages \
  --from-beginning --consumer.config /tmp/team-b-client.properties --group x_consumer_group_b
----
Conversely, even though `team-a-client` can write to topic `x_messages`, the following read request returns a `Not authorized to access group: x_consumer_group_a` error:

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-console-consumer.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic x_messages \
  --from-beginning --consumer.config /tmp/team-a-client.properties --group x_consumer_group_a
----

A consumer group that begins with `a_` is used in the next read request:

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-console-consumer.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic x_messages \
  --from-beginning --consumer.config /tmp/team-a-client.properties --group a_consumer_group_a
----

An error is still returned, but this time it is `Not authorized to access topics: [x_messages]`.

`Dev Team A` has no `Read` access on topics that start with 'x_'.

> User `bob` should can read from or write to any topic:

Author: ```suggestion
User `bob` can read from or write to any topic:
```

Before `team-a-client` can write to the `x_messages` topic, a admin _power user_ must create it with the correct configuration, such as the number of partitions and replicas.

.Managing Kafka with an authorized admin

Admin user `bob` is created with full access to manage everything on the Kafka cluster `my-cluster`.

Helper scripts are used to authenticate to the `keycloak` instance.

The following scripts are downloaded to `/tmp` dir and made executable:

[source,shell]
----
curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-oauth/master/examples/docker/kafka-oauth-strimzi/kafka/oauth.sh -s > /tmp/oauth.sh
   chmod +x /tmp/oauth.sh

curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-oauth/master/examples/docker/kafka-oauth-strimzi/kafka/jwt.sh -s > /tmp/jwt.sh
   chmod +x /tmp/jwt.sh
----

User `bob` authenticates to the Keycloak server with his username and password to get a refresh token.

[source,shell]
----
export TOKEN_ENDPOINT=http://keycloak:8080/auth/realms/kafka-authz/protocol/openid-connect/token
REFRESH_TOKEN=$(/tmp/oauth.sh -q bob)
----

When prompted for a password, 'bob-password' is used.

> The refresh token is a long-lived token that does not expire:

Author: ```suggestion
The refresh token in this case is an offline token which is a long-lived refresh token that does not expire:
```

   /tmp/jwt.sh $REFRESH_TOKEN

> By default this is a long-lived refresh token that does not expire.

Author: ```suggestion
By default this is an offline token which is a long-lived refresh token that does not expire.
```

// Module included in the following module:
//
// con-oauth-authorization-keycloak-authorization-services.adoc

[id='con-oauth-authorization-keycloak-example_{context}']
= Example authorization rules configuration using Authorization Services

This is an end-to-end example of using Keycloak Authorization Services to configure authorization rules for use with `keycloak` authorization in Strimzi.
The example starts by deploying the Keycloak server with pre-configured realms, requiring no additional configuration.
We deploy the Kafka cluster configured to use one of the pre-configured realms.
We connect to the Keycloak Admin Console and demonstrate the sections of the user interface where authorizations rules are configured.
We use Kafka CLI client tools with different personal and service accounts to demonstrate limited access based on the permissions granted to different accounts.

== Token Based Authorization with Keycloak Authorization Services

> Once the Kafka Broker has obtained an access token by using [Strimzi Kafka OAuth](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-oauth) for authentication, it is possible to use centrally managed authorization rules to enforce access restrictions onto Kafka Clients.

Author: ```suggestion
Once the Kafka Broker has obtained an access token by using `oauth` authentication, it is possible to use centrally managed authorization rules to enforce access restrictions onto Kafka Clients.
```

> For this, Strimzi Kafka OAuth supports the use of Keycloak Authorization Services.

Author: ```suggestion
For this, Strimzi Kafka Operator comes with `keycloak` authorization which uses Keycloak Authorization Services to centrally manage permissions.
```

> A custom authorizer has to be configured on the Kafka Broker to take advantage of the Authorization Services REST endpoints available on Keycloak, which provide a list of granted permissions on resources for authenticated users.

Author: ```suggestion
When using `keycloak` authorization a custom authorizer is configured on the Kafka Broker that uses Authorization Services REST endpoints available on Keycloak, which provide a list of granted permissions on resources for authenticated users.
```

We should now receive all the messages for the 'a_messages' topic, after which the client blocks waiting for more messages.

Use CTRL-C to exit.

### Using Kafka's CLI Administration Tools

Let's now list the topics:

    bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config /tmp/team-a-client.properties --list

We get one topic listed: `a_messages`.

Let's try and list the consumer groups:

    bin/kafka-consumer-groups.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config /tmp/team-a-client.properties --list

Similarly to listing topics, we get one consumer group listed: `a_consumer_group_1`.

There are more CLI administrative tools. For example we can try to get the default cluster configuration:

    bin/kafka-configs.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config /tmp/team-a-client.properties \
      --entity-type brokers --describe --entity-default

But that will fail with `Cluster authorization failed.` error, because this operation requires cluster level permissions which `team-a-client` does not have.

> ### Client with Different Permissions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Using clients with different permissions
```

> Let's prepare a configuration for `team-b-client`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As with `team-a-client`, we prepare a Kafka client configuration file with authentication parameters for `team-b-client`.
```

> ```
> cat > /tmp/team-b-client.properties << EOF
> security.protocol=SASL_PLAINTEXT
> sasl.mechanism=OAUTHBEARER
> sasl.jaas.config=org.apache.kafka.common.security.oauthbearer.OAuthBearerLoginModule required \
>   oauth.client.id="team-b-client" \
>   oauth.client.secret="team-b-client-secret" \
>   oauth.token.endpoint.uri="http://keycloak:8080/auth/realms/kafka-authz/protocol/openid-connect/token" ;
> sasl.login.callback.handler.class=io.strimzi.kafka.oauth.client.JaasClientOauthLoginCallbackHandler
> EOF
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,shell]
----
cat > /tmp/team-b-client.properties << EOF
security.protocol=SASL_PLAINTEXT
sasl.mechanism=OAUTHBEARER
sasl.jaas.config=org.apache.kafka.common.security.oauthbearer.OAuthBearerLoginModule required \
  oauth.client.id="team-b-client" \
  oauth.client.secret="team-b-client-secret" \
  oauth.token.endpoint.uri="http://keycloak:8080/auth/realms/kafka-authz/protocol/openid-connect/token" ;
sasl.login.callback.handler.class=io.strimzi.kafka.oauth.client.JaasClientOauthLoginCallbackHandler
EOF
----
```

> If we look at `team-b-client` client configuration in Keycloak, under `Service Account Roles` we can see that it has `Dev Team B` realm role assigned.
> Looking in Keycloak Console at the `kafka` client's `Authorization` tab where `Permissions` are listed, we can see the permissions that start with 'Dev Team B ...'.
> These match the users and service accounts that have the `Dev Team B` realm role assigned to them.
> The `Dev Team B` users have full access to topics beginning with 'b_' on Kafka cluster `my-cluster` (which is the designated cluster name of the demo cluster we brought up), and read access on topics that start with 'x_'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `team-b-client` client configuration includes a `Dev Team B` realm role and permissions that start with `Dev Team B ...`. These match the users and service accounts that have the `Dev Team B` realm role assigned to them.
The `Dev Team B` users have full access to topics beginning with `b_` on the Kafka cluster `my-cluster`, the name of the designated cluster, and read access on topics that start with `x_`.
```

> Let's try produce some messages to topic `a_messages` as `team-b-client`:
> 
> ```
> bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic a_messages \
>   --producer.config /tmp/team-b-client.properties
> Message 1
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `team-b-client` configuration is used to produce messages to topic `a_messages`:

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic a_messages \
  --producer.config /tmp/team-b-client.properties
Message 1
----
```

> We get `Not authorized to access topics: [a_messages]` error as we expected. Let's try to produce to topic `b_messages`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `Not authorized to access topics: [a_messages]` error is returned when trying to push the first message, as expected, so we switch to topic `b_messages`:
```

> ```
> bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic b_messages \
>   --producer.config /tmp/team-b-client.properties
> Message 1
> Message 2
> Message 3
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,yaml,subs="attributes+"]
---
bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic b_messages \
  --producer.config /tmp/team-b-client.properties
Message 1
Message 2
Message 3
----
```

> This should work fine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Producing messages to topic `b_messages` is authorized and successful.
```

> What about producing to topic `x_messages`. `team-b-client` is only supposed to be able to read from such a topic.
> 
> ```
> bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic x_messages \
>   --producer.config /tmp/team-b-client.properties
> Message 1
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We switch again, but this time to topic that `team-b-client` can only read from, topic `x_messages`:

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic x_messages \
  --producer.config /tmp/team-b-client.properties
Message 1
----
```

> We get a `Not authorized to access topics: [x_messages]` error as we expected.
> Client `team-a-client`, on the other hand, should be able to write to such a topic:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `Not authorized to access topics: [x_messages]` error is returned, as expected, so we switch to `team-a-client`:
```

> 
> ```
> bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic x_messages \
>   --producer.config /tmp/team-a-client.properties
> Message 1
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic x_messages \
  --producer.config /tmp/team-a-client.properties
Message 1
----
```

> However, we again receive `Not authorized to access topics: [x_messages]`. What's going on?
> The reason for failure is that while `team-a-client` can write to `x_messages` topic, it does not have a permission to create a topic if it does not yet exist.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `Not authorized to access topics: [x_messages]` error is returned again. Though `team-a-client` can write to the `x_messages` topic, it it does not have a permission to create a topic if it does not yet exist. 
```

> We now need a power user that can create a topic with all the proper settings - like the right number of partitions and replicas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before `team-a-client` can write to the `x_messages` topic, a _power user_ must create it with the correct configuration, such as the number of partitions and replicas.
```

> ### Power User Can Do Anything

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Managing Kafka with an authorized admin
```

> Let's create a configuration for user `bob` who has full ability to manage everything on Kafka cluster `my-cluster`.
> 
> We'll need some helper scripts so we can authenticate to the `keycloak` instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Admin user `bob` is created with full access to manage everything on the Kafka cluster `my-cluster`.

Helper scripts are used to authenticate to the `keycloak` instance.
```

Download the following `oauth.sh` and `jwt.sh` tools to `/tmp` dir and make them executable:

   curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-oauth/master/examples/docker/kafka-oauth-strimzi/kafka/oauth.sh -s > /tmp/oauth.sh
   chmod +x /tmp/oauth.sh

   curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-oauth/master/examples/docker/kafka-oauth-strimzi/kafka/jwt.sh -s > /tmp/jwt.sh

>    chmod +x /tmp/jwt.sh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following scripts are downloaded to `/tmp` dir and made executable:

[source,shell]
----
   curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-oauth/master/examples/docker/kafka-oauth-strimzi/kafka/oauth.sh -s > /tmp/oauth.sh
   chmod +x /tmp/oauth.sh

   curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-oauth/master/examples/docker/kafka-oauth-strimzi/kafka/jwt.sh -s > /tmp/jwt.sh
   chmod +x /tmp/jwt.sh
----

Now, `bob` will authenticate to Keycloak server with his username and password and get a refresh token.

   export TOKEN_ENDPOINT=http://keycloak:8080/auth/realms/kafka-authz/protocol/openid-connect/token

>    REFRESH_TOKEN=$(/tmp/oauth.sh -q bob)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
User `bob` authenticates to the Keycloak server with his username and password to get a refresh token.

[source,shell]
----
   export TOKEN_ENDPOINT=http://keycloak:8080/auth/realms/kafka-authz/protocol/openid-connect/token
   REFRESH_TOKEN=$(/tmp/oauth.sh -q bob)
----

> This will prompt you for a password. Type 'bob-password'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When prompted for a password, 'bob-password' is used.
```

> We can inspect the refresh token:
> 
>    /tmp/jwt.sh $REFRESH_TOKEN
> 
> By default this is a long-lived refresh token that does not expire.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The refresh token is a long-lived token that does not expire:

----
 /tmp/jwt.sh $REFRESH_TOKEN
----
```

> Now we will create the configuration file for `bob`:
> 
> ```
> cat > /tmp/bob.properties << EOF
> security.protocol=SASL_PLAINTEXT
> sasl.mechanism=OAUTHBEARER
> sasl.jaas.config=org.apache.kafka.common.security.oauthbearer.OAuthBearerLoginModule required \
>   oauth.refresh.token="$REFRESH_TOKEN" \
>   oauth.client.id="kafka-cli" \
>   oauth.token.endpoint.uri="http://keycloak:8080/auth/realms/kafka-authz/protocol/openid-connect/token" ;
> sasl.login.callback.handler.class=io.strimzi.kafka.oauth.client.JaasClientOauthLoginCallbackHandler
> EOF
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A configuration file is created for `bob`:

[source,shell]
----
cat > /tmp/bob.properties << EOF
security.protocol=SASL_PLAINTEXT
sasl.mechanism=OAUTHBEARER
sasl.jaas.config=org.apache.kafka.common.security.oauthbearer.OAuthBearerLoginModule required \
  oauth.refresh.token="$REFRESH_TOKEN" \
  oauth.client.id="kafka-cli" \
  oauth.token.endpoint.uri="http://keycloak:8080/auth/realms/kafka-authz/protocol/openid-connect/token" ;
sasl.login.callback.handler.class=io.strimzi.kafka.oauth.client.JaasClientOauthLoginCallbackHandler
EOF
----
```

> Note that we use the `kafka-cli` public client for the `oauth.client.id` in the `sasl.jaas.config`.
> Since that is a public client it does not require any secret.
> We can use this because we authenticate with a token directly (in this case a refresh token is used to request an access token behind the scenes which is then sent to Kafka broker for authentication, and we already did the authentication for the refresh token).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `kafka-cli` public client is used for the `oauth.client.id` in the `sasl.jaas.config`.
Since that is a public client it does not require a Secret.
We can use this because we authenticate with a token directly. In this case, the refresh token requests an access token behind the scenes, which is then sent to the Kafka broker for authentication. The refresh token has already been authenticated.
```

> Let's now try to create the `x_messages` topic:
> 
>     bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config /tmp/bob.properties \
>       --topic x_messages --create --replication-factor 1 --partitions 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
User `bob` creates the `x_messages` topic:

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config /tmp/bob.properties \
  --topic x_messages --create --replication-factor 1 --partitions 1
----
```

> The operation should succeed (you can ignore the warning about periods and underscores).

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> We can list the topics:
> 
>     bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config /tmp/bob.properties --list
> 
> If we try the same as `team-a-client` or `team-b-client` we will get different responses.
> 
>     bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config /tmp/team-a-client.properties --list
>     bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config /tmp/team-b-client.properties --list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
User `bob` can list the topic, but `team-a-client` and `team-b-client` cannot.

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config /tmp/bob.properties --list
bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config /tmp/team-a-client.properties --list
bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config /tmp/team-b-client.properties --list
```

> Roles `Dev Team A`, and `Dev Team B` both have `Describe` permission on topics that start with 'x_', but they cannot see the other team's topics as they do not have `Describe` permissions on them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Dev Team A`, and `Dev Team B` roles both have `Describe` permission on topics that start with `x_`, but they cannot see the other team's topics as they do not have `Describe` permissions on them.
```

> We can now again try to produce to the topic as `team-a-client`.
> 
> ```
> bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic x_messages \
>   --producer.config /tmp/team-a-client.properties
> Message 1
> Message 2
> Message 3
> ```
> 
> This works.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `team-a-client` can now successfully produce to the `x_messages` topic:

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic x_messages \
  --producer.config /tmp/team-a-client.properties
Message 1
Message 2
Message 3
----
```

> If we try the same as `team-b-client` it should fail.
> 
> ```
> bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic x_messages \
>   --producer.config /tmp/team-b-client.properties
> Message 4
> Message 5
> ```
> 
> We get an error - `Not authorized to access topics: [x_messages]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However,  `team-b-client` cannot produce to the `x_messages` topic:

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic x_messages \
  --producer.config /tmp/team-b-client.properties
Message 4
Message 5
----
```

But `team-b-client` should be able to consume messages from the `x_messages` topic:

    bin/kafka-console-consumer.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic x_messages \
      --from-beginning --consumer.config /tmp/team-b-client.properties --group x_consumer_group_b

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, due to its Keycloak settings `team-b-client` can consume messages from the `x_messages` topic:

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-console-consumer.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic x_messages \
  --from-beginning --consumer.config /tmp/team-b-client.properties --group x_consumer_group_b
----

> Whereas `team-a-client` does not have permission to read, even though they can write:
> 
>     bin/kafka-console-consumer.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic x_messages \
>       --from-beginning --consumer.config /tmp/team-a-client.properties --group x_consumer_group_a
> 
> We get a `Not authorized to access group: x_consumer_group_a` error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conversely, `team-a-client` does not have permission to read from topic `x_messages`, even though it can write, so the following operation returns an error:

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-console-consumer.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic x_messages \
  --from-beginning --consumer.config /tmp/team-a-client.properties --group x_consumer_group_a
----
```

> What if we try to use a consumer group name that starts with 'a_'?
> 
>     bin/kafka-console-consumer.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic x_messages \
>       --from-beginning --consumer.config /tmp/team-a-client.properties --group a_consumer_group_a
> 
> We now get a different error: `Not authorized to access topics: [x_messages]`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A consumer group that begins with `a_` is used in the next read request:

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-console-consumer.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic x_messages \
  --from-beginning --consumer.config /tmp/team-a-client.properties --group a_consumer_group_a
----

An error is still returned, but this time it is `Not authorized to access topics: [x_messages]`.
```

> It just won't work - `Dev Team A` has no `Read` access on topics that start with 'x_'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Dev Team A` has no `Read` access on topics that start with 'x_'.
```

> User `bob` should have no problem reading from or writing to any topic:
> 
>     bin/kafka-console-consumer.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic x_messages \
>       --from-beginning --consumer.config /tmp/bob.properties

Reviewer: ```suggestion
User `bob` should can read from or write to any topic:

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-console-consumer.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic x_messages \
  --from-beginning --consumer.config /tmp/bob.properties
----
```
